gh-71784: [doc] add usage examples for traceback.TracebackException (#125189)
python/cpython: Doc/library/traceback.rst

--------------

This module provides a standard interface to extract, format and print
stack traces of Python programs.  It can mimic the behavior of the Python
interpreter when it prints a stack trace, which is useful when you want

> to print stack traces under program control. It is also more flexible

Reviewer: I don't feel like I understand what "under program control" means here, though that's admittedly a pre-existing issue with the docs here

Author: I agree. I think this whole sentence can be removed.

> than the interpreter's default traceback printout, so it is possible to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
than the interpreter's default traceback display, so it is possible to
```

--------------

This module provides a standard interface to extract, format and print
stack traces of Python programs. It is more flexible than the
interpreter's default traceback display, and therefore makes it
possible to configure certain aspects of the output. Finally,
it contains a utility for capturing enough information about an
exception to print it later, without the need to save a reference
to the actual exception. Since exceptions can be the roots of large

> objects graph, using this utility can significantly improve

Reviewer: "using this utility" sounds odd because they have the same etymological root 😄 I think we don't actually need "using" here at all:

```suggestion
objects graph, this utility can significantly improve
```

   Module :mod:`pdb`
      Interactive source code debugger for Python programs.

> In the following, we first introduce a number of module-level functions that
> offer basic functionality. They are sufficient for many use cases, including
> interactive inspection of exceptions and tracebacks. We then describe the
> :class:`TracebackException` class and its two helper classes
> :class:`StackSummary` and :class:`FrameSummary`. They offer both more
> flexibility in the output generated and the ability to store the information
> necessary for later formatting without holding references to actual exception
> and traceback objects.

Reviewer: I think this could be said more concisely and directly. How about something like this?

```suggestion
The module's API can be divided into two parts:
* Module-level functions offering basic functionality, which are useful for interactive
  inspection of exceptions and tracebacks.
* :class:`TracebackException` class and its helper classes
  :class:`StackSummary` and :class:`FrameSummary`. These offer both more
  flexibility in the output generated and the ability to store the information
  necessary for later formatting without holding references to actual exception
  and traceback objects.
```

   Module :mod:`pdb`
      Interactive source code debugger for Python programs.

> The module's API can be divided into two parts:
> * Module-level functions offering basic functionality, which are useful for interactive
>   inspection of exceptions and tracebacks.
> * :class:`TracebackException` class and its helper classes

Reviewer: I think this should fix the failing docs CI job:

```suggestion
The module's API can be divided into two parts:

* Module-level functions offering basic functionality, which are useful for interactive
  inspection of exceptions and tracebacks.

* :class:`TracebackException` class and its helper classes
```

   .. versionadded:: 3.5

:class:`!TracebackException` Objects
------------------------------------

.. versionadded:: 3.5

> :class:`TracebackException` objects are created from actual exceptions to

Reviewer: This link just takes you down to the next paragraph. I don't think it's useful, and too many links in a page just distract the reader with all the blue-coloured text and underlines. I would continue to suppress it:

```suggestion
:class:`!TracebackException` objects are created from actual exceptions to
```

On the other hand, when you mention "traceback objects" and "frame objects" later on in this paragraph, you could easily add links to [frame objects](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#frame-objects) and [traceback objects](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#traceback-objects) in the data model (it would be `` :ref:`frame-objects` `` and `` :ref:`traceback-objects` ``, respectively). Those would be useful links, I think.

capture data for later printing.  They offer a more lightweight method of

> storing this information because they don't hold references to traceback

Reviewer: ```suggestion
storing this information by avoiding holding references to traceback
```

   ['  File "spam.py", line 3, in <module>\n    spam.eggs()\n',
    '  File "eggs.py", line 42, in eggs\n    return "bacon"\n']
   >>> an_error = IndexError('tuple index out of range')
   >>> traceback.format_exception_only(an_error)
   ['IndexError: tuple index out of range\n']

> Examples of Using `TracebackException`

Author: ```suggestion
Examples of Using ``TracebackException``
```

> Examples of Using ``TracebackException``

Author: ```suggestion
Examples of Using :class:`TracebackException`
```

---------------------------------------------

With the helper class, we have more options::

>    import sys

Reviewer: Is this a REPL example or an example of how you might write a script? It appears to be somewhere between the two currently :-)

I'd make it a REPL example, similar to the two immediately above this section.

   ['  File "spam.py", line 3, in <module>\n    spam.eggs()\n',
    '  File "eggs.py", line 42, in eggs\n    return "bacon"\n']
   >>> an_error = IndexError('tuple index out of range')
   >>> traceback.format_exception_only(an_error)
   ['IndexError: tuple index out of range\n']

Examples of Using :class:`TracebackException`
---------------------------------------------

> With the helper class, we have more options::

Reviewer: if we use the `.. doctest::` directive, this REPL example will get tested in CI, which could help ensure it stayes up to date when the traceback format is changed in the future:

```suggestion
With the helper class, we have more options:

.. doctest::
```

   >>> import sys
   >>> from traceback import TracebackException

>    ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   >>>
```

   >>> def lumberjack():
   ...     bright_side_of_life()
   ...
   >>> def bright_side_of_life():
   ...     t = "bright", "side", "of", "life"
   ...     return t[5]
   ...
   >>> try:
   ...     lumberjack()
   ... except IndexError as e:
   ...     exc = e
   ...
   >>> try:
   ...     try:
   ...         lumberjack()
   ...     except:
   ...         1/0
   ... except Exception as e:
   ...     chained_exc = e
   ...
   >>> # limit works as with the module-level functions
   >>> TracebackException.from_exception(exc, limit=-2).print()
   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "<python-input-1>", line 6, in lumberjack
       bright_side_of_life()
       ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~^^
     File "<python-input-1>", line 10, in bright_side_of_life
       return t[5]
              ~^^^
   IndexError: tuple index out of range

>    # capture_locals adds local variables in frames

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   >>> # capture_locals adds local variables in frames
```

   >>> TracebackException.from_exception(exc, limit=-2, capture_locals=True).print()
   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "<python-input-1>", line 6, in lumberjack
       bright_side_of_life()
       ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~^^
     File "<python-input-1>", line 10, in bright_side_of_life
       return t[5]
              ~^^^
       t = ("bright", "side", "of", "life")
   IndexError: tuple index out of range

>    # The *chain* kwarg to print() controls whether chained
>    # exceptions are displayed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   >>> # The *chain* kwarg to print() controls whether chained
   >>> # exceptions are displayed
```
